Trace-based Just-in-Time Type Specialization for Dynamic
Languages
Andreas Gal∗+, Brendan Eich∗, Mike Shaver∗, David Anderson∗, David Mandelin∗, 
Mohammad R. Haghighat$, Blake Kaplan∗, Graydon Hoare∗, Boris Zbarsky∗, Jason Orendorff∗, 
Jesse Ruderman∗, Edwin Smith#, Rick Reitmaier#, Michael Bebenita+, Mason Chang+#, Michael Franz+
Mozilla Corporation∗
{gal,brendan,shaver,danderson,dmandelin,mrbkap,graydon,bz,jorendorff,jruderman}@mozilla.com
Adobe Corporation# 
{edwsmith,rreitmai}@adobe.com
Intel Corporation$ 
{mohammad.r.haghighat}@intel.com
University of California, Irvine+ 
{mbebenit,changm,franz}@uci.edu
Abstract 	and is used for the application logic of browser-based productivity
DynamiclanguagessuchasJavaScriptaremoredifficulttocom-pile than statically typed ones. Since no concrete type information is available, traditional compilers need to emit generic code that can handle all possible type combinations at runtime. We present an al-ternativecompilationtechniquefordynamically-typedlanguages that identifies frequently executed loop traces at run-time and then generatesmachinecodeontheflythatisspecializedfortheac-tualdynamictypesoccurringoneachpaththroughtheloop.Our method provides cheap inter-procedural type specialization, and an elegant and efficient way of incrementally compiling lazily discov-ered alternative paths through nested loops. We have implemented a dynamic compiler for JavaScript based on our technique and we havemeasuredspeedupsof10xandmoreforcertainbenchmark programs.
applicationssuchasGoogleMail,GoogleDocsandZimbraCol-laborationSuite.Inthisdomain,inordertoprovideafluiduser experience and enable a new generation of applications, virtual ma-chines must provide a low startup time and high performance.
Compilers for statically typed languages rely on type informa-tion to generate efficient machine code. In a dynamically typed pro-gramminglanguagesuchasJavaScript,thetypesofexpressions mayvaryatruntime.Thismeansthatthecompilercannolonger easilytransformoperationsintomachineinstructionsthatoperate on one specific type. Without exact type information, the compiler mustemitslowergeneralizedmachinecodethatcandealwithall potential type combinations. While compile-time static type infer-encemightbeabletogathertypeinformationtogenerateopti-mizedmachinecode,traditionalstaticanalysisisveryexpensive and hence not well suited for the highly interactive environment of
1. 	Introduction
Dynamic languages such as JavaScript, Python, and Ruby, are pop-ular since they are expressive, accessible to non-experts, and make deployment as easy as distributing a source file. They are used for smallscriptsaswellasforcomplexapplications.JavaScript,for example, is the de facto standard for client-side web programming
Permissiontomakedigitalorhardcopiesofallorpartofthisworkforpersonalor classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
them,andcompilesthemtofastnativecode.Wecallsuchase-quence of instructions a trace.
Unlikemethod-baseddynamiccompilers,ourdynamiccom-pileroperatesatthegranularityofindividualloops.Thisdesign choiceisbasedontheexpectationthatprogramsspendmostof theirtimeinhotloops.Evenindynamicallytypedlanguages,we expect hot loops to be mostly type-stable, meaning that the types of values are invariant. (12) For example, we would expect loop coun-ters that start as integers to remain integers for all iterations. When bothoftheseexpectationshold,atrace-basedcompilercancover the program execution with a small number of type-specialized, ef-ficiently compiled traces.
Each compiled trace covers one path through the program with one mapping of values to types. When the VM executes a compiled
Copyrightc⃝2009 ACM 978-1-60558-392-1/09/06...$5.00
orthatthesametypeswilloccurinsubsequentloopiterations.
Hence, recording and compiling a trace speculates that the path and typing will be exactly as they were during recording for subsequent iterations of the loop.
Every compiled trace contains all the guards (checks) required tovalidatethespeculation.Ifoneoftheguardsfails(ifcontrol flowisdifferent,oravalueofadifferenttypeisgenerated),the traceexits.Ifanexitbecomeshot,theVMcanrecordabranch trace starting at the exit to cover the new path. In this way, the VM records a trace tree covering all the hot paths through the loop.
1for(vari=2;i<100;++i){ 
2 	if(!primes[i]) 
3 		continue; 
4 	for(vark=i+i;i<100;k+=i) 5 
		primes[k]=false; 6}
Figure1.Sampleprogram:sieveofEratosthenes.primesis initializedtoanarrayof100falsevaluesonentrytothiscode
	NestedloopscanbedifficulttooptimizefortracingVMs.In 	snippet. ana¨ıveimplementation,innerloopswouldbecomehotfirst,and 
theVMwouldstarttracingthere.Whentheinnerloopexits,the 
VM would detect that a different branch was taken. The VM would
number of loops nested to any depth without causing excessive tail 
duplication.
ThesetechniquesallowaVMtodynamicallytranslateapro-gramtonested,type-specializedtracetrees.Becausetracescan cross function call boundaries, our techniques also achieve the ef-fects of inlining. Because traces have no internal control-flow joins, theycanbeoptimizedinlineartimebyasimplecompiler(10). Thus,ourtracingVMefficientlyperformsthesamekindofop-timizationsthatwouldrequireinterproceduralanalysisinastatic optimization setting. This makes tracing an attractive and effective tool to type specialize even complex function call-rich code.
We implemented these techniques for an existing JavaScript in-terpreter,SpiderMonkey.WecalltheresultingtracingVMTrace-Monkey. TraceMonkey supports all the JavaScript features of Spi-derMonkey, with a 2x-20x speedup for traceable programs.
This paper makes the following contributions:
•We explain an algorithm for dynamically forming trace trees to cover a program, representing nested loops as nested trace trees.
•We explain how to speculatively generate efficient type-specialized code for traces from dynamic language programs.
•We validate our tracing techniques in an implementation based ontheSpiderMonkeyJavaScriptinterpreter,achieving2x-20x speedups on many programs.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 3 is a general overview of trace tree based compilation we use to cap-tureandcompilefrequentlyexecutedcoderegions.InSection4 wedescribeourapproachofcoveringnestedloopsusinganum-berofindividualtracetrees.InSection5wedescribeourtrace-compilation based speculative type specialization approach we use to generate efficient machine code from recorded bytecode traces.
Figure2.StatemachinedescribingthemajoractivitiesofTrace-Monkeyandtheconditionsthatcausetransitionstoanewactiv-ity.Inthedarkbox,TMexecutesJSascompiledtraces.Inthe light gray boxes, TM executes JS in the standard interpreter. White boxesareoverhead.Thus,tomaximizeperformance,weneedto maximize time spent in the darkest box and minimize time spent in the white boxes. The best case is a loop where the types at the loop edge are the same as the types on entry–then TM can stay in native code until the loop is done.
asetofindustrybenchmarks.Thepaperendswithconclusionsin Section 9 and an outlook on future work is presented in Section 10.
2. Overview: Example Tracing Run
Thissectionprovidesanoverviewofoursystembydescribing howTraceMonkeyexecutesanexampleprogram.Theexample program, shown in Figure 1, computes the first 100 prime numbers with nested loops. The narrative should be read along with Figure 2, which describes the activities TraceMonkey performs and when it transitions between the loops.
TraceMonkeyalwaysbeginsexecutingaprograminthebyte-codeinterpreter.Everyloopbackedgeisapotentialtracepoint. Whentheinterpretercrossesaloopedge,TraceMonkeyinvokes the trace monitor, which may decide to record or execute a native trace. At the start of execution, there are no compiled traces yet, so the trace monitor counts the number of times each loop back edge is executed until a loop becomes hot, currently after 2 crossings. Note that the way our loops are compiled, the loop edge is crossed before entering the loop, so the second crossing occurs immediately after
Ourimplementationofadynamictype-specializingcompilerfor 	the first iteration.
JavaScriptisdescribedinSection6.Relatedworkisdiscussedin 	Hereisthesequenceofeventsbrokendownbyouterloop
Section 8. In Section 7 we evaluate our dynamic compiler based on 	iteration:
Figure3.LIRsnippetforsampleprogram.ThisistheLIRrecordedforline5ofthesampleprograminFigure1.TheLIRencodes thesemanticsinSSAformusingtemporaryvariables.TheLIRalsoencodesallthestoresthattheinterpreterwoulddotoitsdatastack. Sometimes these stores can be optimized away as the stack locations are live only on exits to the interpreter. Finally, the LIR records guards and side exits to verify the assumptions made in this recording: that primes is an array and that the call to set its element succeeds.
movedx,ebx(748) 	//loadprimesfromthetraceactivationrecord movedi(0),edx 	//(*)storeprimestointerpreterstack movesi,ebx(764) 	//loadkfromthetraceactivationrecord movedi(8),esi 	//(*)storektointerpreterstack 
movedi(16),0 	//(*)storefalsetointerpreterstack 
moveax,edx(4) 	//(*)loadobjectclasswordforprimes andeax,-4 	//(*)maskoutobjectclasstagforprimes cmpeax,Array 	//(*)testwhetherprimesisanarray 
jneside_exit_1 	//(*)sideexitifprimesisnotanarray subesp,8 	//bumpstackforcallalignmentconvention pushfalse 	//pushlastargumentforcall 
pushesi 	//pushfirstargumentforcall 
calljs_Array_set 	//callfunctiontosetarrayelement 
addesp,8 	//cleanupextrastackspace 
movecx,ebx 	//(*)createdbyregisterallocator 
testeax,eax 	//(*)testreturnvalueofjs_Array_set jeside_exit_2 	//(*)sideexitifcallfailed 
...
side_exit_1:
Figure 4.x86 snippet for sample program. This is the x86 code compiled from the LIR snippet in Figure 3. Most LIR instructions compile toasinglex86instruction.Instructionsmarkedwith(*)wouldbeomittedbyanidealizedcompilerthatknewthatnoneofthesideexits would ever be taken. The 17 instructions generated by the compiler compare favorably with the 100+ instructions that the interpreter would execute for the same code snippet, including 4 indirect jumps.
i=2.Thisisthefirstiterationoftheouterloop.Theloopon lines 4-5 becomes hot on its second iteration, so TraceMonkey en-tersrecordingmodeonline4.Inrecordingmode,TraceMonkey records the code along the trace in a low-level compiler intermedi-ate representation we call LIR. The LIR trace encodes all the oper-ations performed and the types of all operands. The LIR trace also encodes guards, which are checks that verify that the control flow andtypesareidenticaltothoseobservedduringtracerecording. Thus,onlaterexecutions,ifandonlyifallguardsarepassed,the trace has the required program semantics.
TraceMonkeystopsrecordingwhenexecutionreturnstothe loop header or exits the loop. In this case, execution returns to the loop header on line 4.
After recording is finished, TraceMonkey compiles the trace to nativecodeusingtherecordedtypeinformationforoptimization.
interpreter PC and the types of values match those observed when tracerecordingwasstarted.Thefirsttraceinourexample,T45, covers lines 4 and 5. This trace can be entered if the PC is at line 4, i and k are integers, and primes is an object. After compiling T45, TraceMonkey returns to the interpreter and loops back to line 1.
i=3.Nowtheloopheaderatline1hasbecomehot,soTrace-Monkeystartsrecording.Whenrecordingreachesline4,Trace-Monkeyobservesthatithasreachedaninnerloopheaderthatal-readyhasacompiledtrace,soTraceMonkeyattemptstonestthe inner loop inside the current trace. The first step is to call the inner trace as a subroutine. This executes the loop on line 4 to completion and then returns to the recorder. TraceMonkey verifies that the call was successful and then records the call to the inner trace as part of the current trace. Recording continues until execution reaches line 1,andatwhichpointTraceMonkeyfinishesandcompilesatrace
Theresultisanativecodefragmentthatcanbeenteredifthe 	for the outer loop, T16.
i=4. On this iteration, TraceMonkey calls T16. Because i=4, the ifstatementonline2istaken.Thisbranchwasnottakeninthe original trace, so this causes T16 to fail a guard and take a side exit. Theexitisnotyethot,soTraceMonkeyreturnstotheinterpreter, which executes the continue statement.
i=5. TraceMonkey calls T16, which in turn calls the nested trace T45.T16loopsbacktoitsownheader,startingthenextiteration without ever returning to the monitor.
A trace records all its intermediate values in a small activation record area. To make variable accesses fast on trace, the trace also imports localand globalvariables by unboxingthem andcopying themtoitsactivationrecord.Thus,thetracecanreadandwrite these variables with simple loads and stores from a native activation recording,independentlyoftheboxingmechanismusedbythe interpreter.Whenthetraceexits,theVMboxesthevaluesfrom this native storage location and copies them back to the interpreter
i=6. On this iteration, the side exit on line 2 is taken again. This 	structures.
time,thesideexitbecomeshot,soatraceT23,1isrecordedthat covers line 3 and returns to the loop header. Thus, the end of T23,1 jumpsdirectlytothestartofT16.Thesideexitispatchedsothat on future iterations, it jumps directly to T23,1.
At this point, TraceMonkey has compiled enough traces to cover
Foreverycontrol-flowbranchinthesourceprogram,the recorder generates conditional exit LIR instructions. These instruc-tionsexitfromthetraceifrequiredcontrolflowisdifferentfrom whatitwasattracerecording,ensuringthatthetraceinstructions arerunonlyiftheyaresupposedto.Wecalltheseinstructions
theentirenestedloopstructure,sotherestoftheprogramruns 	guard instructions.
entirely as native code. 	Most of our traces represent loops and end with the special loop
LIRinstruction.Thisisjustanunconditionalbranchtothetopof
Inthissection,wedescribetraces,tracetrees,andhowtheyare formed at run time. Although our techniques apply to any dynamic languageinterpreter,wewilldescribethemassumingabytecode interpreter to keep the exposition simple.
3.1 	Traces
Atraceissimplyaprogrampath,whichmaycrossfunctioncall boundaries. TraceMonkey focuses on loop traces, that originate at a loop edge and represent a single iteration through the associated loop.
Similartoanextendedbasicblock,atraceisonlyenteredat the top, but may have many exits. In contrast to an extended basic block,atracecancontainjoinnodes.Sinceatracealwaysonly follows one single path through the original program, however, join nodesarenotrecognizableassuchinatraceandhaveasingle predecessor node like regular nodes.
A typed trace is a trace annotated with a type for every variable (including temporaries) on the trace. A typed trace also has an entry typemapgivingtherequiredtypesforvariablesusedonthetrace before they are defined. For example, a trace could have a type map (x:int,b:boolean),meaningthatthetracemaybeentered only if the value of the variable x is of type int and the value of b is of type boolean. The entry type map is much like the signature of a function.
Inthispaper,weonlydiscusstypedlooptraces,andwewill refertothemsimplyas“traces”.Thekeypropertyoftypedloop traces is that they can be compiled to efficient machine code using the same techniques used for typed languages.
In TraceMonkey, traces are recorded in trace-flavored SSA LIR (low-levelintermediaterepresentation).Intrace-flavoredSSA(or TSSA), phi nodes appear only at the entry point, which is reached bothonentryandvialoopedges.TheimportantLIRprimitives areconstantvalues,memoryloadsandstores(byaddressand offset),integeroperators,floating-pointoperators,functioncalls, and conditional exits. Type conversions, such as integer to double, arerepresentedbyfunctioncalls.ThismakestheLIRusedby TraceMonkeyindependentoftheconcretetypesystemandtype conversionrulesofthesourcelanguage.TheLIRoperationsare generic enough that the backend compiler is language independent. Figure 3 shows an example LIR trace.
Bytecodeinterpreterstypicallyrepresentvaluesinavarious complexdatastructures(e.g.,hashtables)inaboxedformat(i.e., withattachedtypetagbits).Sinceatraceisintendedtorepresent efficientcodethateliminatesallthatcomplexity,ourtracesoper-ateonunboxedvaluesinsimplevariablesandarraysasmuchas possible.
partofrecordingLIR.Alloftheseoptimizationsreducecomplex dynamiclanguageconstructstosimpletypedconstructsbyspe-cializing for the current trace. Each optimization requires guard in-structionstoverifytheirassumptionsaboutthestateandexitthe trace if necessary.
Type specialization.
AllLIRprimitivesapplytooperandsofspecifictypes.Thus, LIRtracesarenecessarilytype-specialized,andacompilercan easilyproduceatranslationthatrequiresnotypedispatches.A typical bytecode interpreter carries tag bits along with each value, and to perform any operation, must check the tag bits, dynamically dispatch,maskoutthetagbitstorecovertheuntaggedvalue, perform the operation, and then reapply tags. LIR omits everything except the operation itself.
A potential problem is that some operations can produce values ofunpredictabletypes.Forexample,readingapropertyfroman objectcouldyieldavalueofanytype,notnecessarilythetype observedduringrecording.Therecorderemitsguardinstructions that conditionally exit if the operation yields a value of a different typefromthatseenduringrecording.Theseguardinstructions guarantee that as long as execution is on trace, the types of values match those of the typed trace. When the VM observes a side exit along such a type guard, a new typed trace is recorded originating at the side exit location, capturing the new type of the operation in question.
Representationspecialization:objects.InJavaScript,name lookupsemanticsarecomplexandpotentiallyexpensivebecause they include features like object inheritance and eval. To evaluate anobjectpropertyreadexpressionlikeo.x,theinterpretermust search the property map of o and all of its prototypes and parents. Propertymapscanbeimplementedwithdifferentdatastructures (e.g.,per-objecthashtablesorsharedhashtables),sothesearch processalsomustdispatchontherepresentationofeachobject found during search. TraceMonkey can simply observe the result of thesearchprocessandrecordthesimplestpossibleLIRtoaccess the property value. For example, the search might finds the value of o.x in the prototype of o, which uses a shared hash-table represen-tation that places x in slot 2 of a property vector. Then the recorded can generate LIR that reads o.x with just two or three loads: one to get the prototype, possibly one to get the property value vector, and one more to get slot 2 from the vector. This is a vast simplification and speedup compared to the original interpreter code. Inheritance relationshipsandobjectrepresentationscanchangeduringexecu-tion, so the simplified code requires guard instructions that ensure the object representation is the same. In TraceMonkey, objects’ rep-
resentationsareassignedanintegerkeycalledtheobjectshape.
Thus, the guard is a simple equality check on the object shape.
Representationspecialization:numbers.JavaScripthasno integertype,onlyaNumbertypethatisthesetof64-bitIEEE-754floating-pointernumbers(“doubles”).ButmanyJavaScript operators, in particular array accesses and bitwise operators, really operate on integers, so they first convert the number to an integer, andthenconvertanyintegerresultbacktoadouble.1Clearly,a JavaScript VM that wants to be fast must find a way to operate on integers directly and avoid these conversions.
InTraceMonkey,wesupporttworepresentationsfornumbers: integersanddoubles.Theinterpreterusesintegerrepresentations as much as it can, switching for results that can only be represented as doubles. When a trace is started, some values may be imported andrepresentedasintegers.Someoperationsonintegersrequire guards. For example, adding two integers can produce a value too large for the integer representation.
Functioninlining.LIRtracescancrossfunctionboundaries ineitherdirection,achievingfunctioninlining.Moveinstructions need to be recorded for function entry and exit to copy arguments in and return values out. These move statements are then optimized awaybythecompilerusingcopypropagation.Inordertobeable toreturntotheinterpreter,thetracemustalsogenerateLIRto recordthatacallframehasbeenenteredandexited.Theframe entryandexitLIRsavesjustenoughinformationtoallowthe intepretercallstacktoberestoredlaterandismuchsimplerthan theinterpreter’sstandardcallcode.Ifthefunctionbeingentered isnotconstant(whichinJavaScriptincludesanycallbyfunction name),therecordermustalsoemitLIRtoguardthatthefunction
Starting a tree. Tree trees always start at loop headers, because they are a natural place to look for hot paths. In TraceMonkey, loop headersareeasytodetect–thebytecodecompilerensuresthata bytecode is a loop header iff it is the target of a backward branch. TraceMonkey starts a tree when a given loop header has been exe-cuted a certain number of times (2 in the current implementation). Starting a tree just means starting recording a trace for the current point and type map and marking the trace as the root of a tree. Each tree is associated with a loop header and type map, so there may be several trees for a given loop header.
Closing the loop. Trace recording can end in several ways.
Ideally,thetracereachestheloopheaderwhereitstartedwith thesametypemapasonentry.Thisiscalledatype-stableloop iteration.Inthiscase,theendofthetracecanjumprighttothe beginning, as all the value representations are exactly as needed to enter the trace. The jump can even skip the usual code that would copy out the state at the end of the trace and copy it back in to the trace activation record to enter a trace.
Incertaincasesthetracemightreachtheloopheaderwitha different type map. This scenario is sometime observed for the first iteration of a loop. Some variables inside the loop might initially be undefined, before they are set to a concrete type during the first loop iteration.Whenrecordingsuchaniteration,therecordercannot link the trace back to its own loop header since it is type-unstable. Instead, the iteration is terminated with a side exit that will always failandreturntotheinterpreter.Atthesametimeanewtraceis recordedwiththenewtypemap.Everytimeanadditionaltype-unstable trace is added to a region, its exit type map is compared to theentrymapofallexistingtracesincasetheycomplementeach
is the same. 	other.Withthisapproachweareabletocovertype-unstableloop
Guardsandsideexits.Eachoptimizationdescribedabove requiresoneormoreguardstoverifytheassumptionsmadein doing the optimization. A guard is just a group of LIR instructions thatperformsatestandconditionalexit.Theexitbranchestoa
iterations as long they eventually form a stable equilibrium.
Finally,thetracemightexittheloopbeforereachingtheloop header, for example because execution reaches a break or return statement. In this case, the VM simply ends the trace with an exit
sideexit,asmalloff-tracepieceofLIRthatreturnsapointerto 	to the trace monitor.
astructurethatdescribesthereasonfortheexitalongwiththe interpreter PC at the exit point and any other data needed to restore the interpreter’s state structures.
Aborts.SomeconstructsaredifficulttorecordinLIRtraces. Forexample,evalorcallstoexternalfunctionscanchangethe programstateinunpredictableways,makingitdifficultforthe tracertoknowthecurrenttypemapinordertocontinuetracing. A tracing implementation can also have any number of other limi-tations, e.g.,a small-memory device may limit the length of traces. Whenanysituationoccursthatpreventstheimplementationfrom continuing trace recording, the implementation aborts trace record-ing and returns to the trace monitor.
3.2 	Trace Trees
Especiallysimpleloops,namelythosewherecontrolflow,value types, value representations, and inlined functions are all invariant, canberepresentedbyasingletrace.Butmostloopshaveatleast somevariation,andsotheprogramwilltakesideexitsfromthe maintrace.Whenasideexitbecomeshot,TraceMonkeystartsa new branch trace from that point and patches the side exit to jump directly to that trace. In this way, a single trace expands on demand to a single-entry, multiple-exit trace tree.
This section explains how trace trees are formed during execu-tion. The goal is to form trace trees during execution that cover all the hot paths of the program.
1 Arrays are actually worse than this: if the index value is a number, it must be converted from a double to a string for the property access operator, and then to an integer internally to the array implementation.
Asmentionedpreviously,wemayspeculativelychosetorep-resent certain Number-typed values as integers on trace. We do so whenweobservethatNumber-typedvariablescontainaninteger value at trace entry. If during trace recording the variable is unex-pectedlyassignedanon-integervalue,wehavetowidenthetype of the variable to a double. As a result, the recorded trace becomes inherentlytype-unstablesinceitstartswithanintegervaluebut ends with a double value. This represents a mis-speculation, since at trace entry we specialized the Number-typed value to an integer, assuming that at the loop edge we would again find an integer value in the variable, allowing us to close the loop. To avoid future spec-ulativefailuresinvolvingthisvariable,andtoobtainatype-stable trace we note the fact that the variable in question as been observed to sometimes hold non-integer values in an advisory data structure which we call the “oracle”.
When compiling loops, we consult the oracle before specializ-ingvaluestointegers.Speculationtowardsintegersisperformed onlyifnoadverseinformationisknowntotheoracleaboutthat particular variable. Whenever we accidentally compile a loop that istype-unstableduetomis-speculationofaNumber-typedvari-able,weimmediatelytriggertherecordingofanewtrace,which based on the now updated oracle information will start with a dou-ble value and thus become type stable.
Extendingatree.Sideexitsleadtodifferentpathsthrough the loop, or paths with different types orrepresentations.Thus,to completely cover the loop, the VM must record traces starting at all side exits. These traces are recorded much like root traces: there is a counter for each side exit, and when the counter reaches a hotness threshold, recording starts. Recording stops exactly as for the root trace, using the loop header of the root trace as the target to reach.
		Branch Trace 3.3 	Blacklisting 		Guard
Sometimes,aprogramfollowsapaththatcannotbecompiled 	Side Exit
intoatrace,usuallybecauseoflimitationsintheimplementation. 
TraceMonkeydoesnotcurrentlysupportrecordingthrowingand 
catching of arbitrary exceptions. This design trade off was chosen, 
becauseexceptionsareusuallyrareinJavaScript.However,ifa 
programoptstouseexceptionsintensively,wewouldsuddenly 
incurapunishingruntimeoverheadifwerepeatedlytrytorecord
atraceforthispathandrepeatedlyfailtodoso,sinceweabort tracing every time we observe an exception being thrown.
As a result, if a hot loop contains traces that always fail, the VM couldpotentiallyrunmuchmoreslowlythanthebaseinterpreter: the VM repeatedly spends time trying to record traces, but is never able to run any. To avoid this problem, whenever the VM is about to start tracing, it must try to predict whether it will finish the trace.
Ourpredictionalgorithmisbasedonblacklistingtracesthat
Figure5.Atreewithtwotraces,atrunktraceandonebranch trace. The trunk trace contains a guard to which a branch trace was attached. The branch trace contain a guard that may fail and trigger a side exit. Both the trunk and the branch trace loop back to the tree anchor, which is the beginning of the trace tree.
atthatpointuntilitispassedafewmoretimes(32inourimple-
mentation).Thisbackoffcountergivestemporaryconditionsthat
amount of time just finding the loop fragment and determining that 
it has been blacklisted. We now avoid that problem by patching the
the interpreter will never again even call into the trace monitor.
	There is a related problem we have not yet solved, which occurs when a loop meets all of these conditions:
•The VM can form at least one root trace for the loop.
•ThereisatleastonehotsideexitforwhichtheVMcannot complete a trace.
•The loop body is short.
In this case, the VM will repeatedly pass the loop header, search foratrace,findit,executeit,andfallbacktotheinterpreter. Withashortloopbody,theoverheadoffindingandcallingthe traceishigh,andcausesperformancetobeevenslowerthanthe basicinterpreter.Sofar,inthissituationwehaveimprovedthe implementationsothattheVMcancompletethebranchtrace. Butitishardtoguaranteethatthissituationwillneverhappen. Asfuturework,thissituationcouldbeavoidedbydetectingand blacklistingloopsforwhichtheaveragetracecallexecutesfew bytecodes before returning to the interpreter.
Figure6.Wehandletype-unstableloopsbyallowingtracesto compilethatcannotloopbacktothemselvesduetoatypemis-match. As such traces accumulate, we attempt to connect their loop edges to form groups of trace trees that can execute without having toside-exittotheinterpretertocoveroddtypecases.Thisispar-ticularly important for nested trace trees where an outer tree tries to call an inner tree (or in this case a forest of inner trees), since inner loops frequently have initially undefined values which change type to a concrete value after the first iteration.
throughtheinnerloop,{i2, i3, i5, α}.Theαsymbolisusedto indicate that the trace loops back the tree anchor.
When execution leaves the inner loop, the basic design has two choices. First, the system can stop tracing and give up on compiling the outer loop, clearly an undesirable solution. The other choice is tocontinuetracing,compilingtracesfortheouterloopinsidethe inner loop’s trace tree.
Figure 7 shows basic trace tree compilation (11) applied to a nested loopwheretheinnerloopcontainstwopaths.Usually,theinner loop (with header at i2) becomes hot first, and a trace tree is rooted atthatpoint.Forexample,thefirstrecordedtracemaybeacycle
Later,theprogrammighttaketheotherbranchati2andthen exit,recordinganotherbranchtraceincorporatingtheouterloop: {i2, i4, i5, i7, i1, i6, i7, i1, α}. Thus, the outer loop is recorded and compiled twice, and both copies must be retained in the trace cache.
Tree Call
Nested Tree
			Exit Guard i4 t4 i5
i5
i7 	Exit Guard
i6
Figure 7.Control flow graph of a nested loop with an if statement insidetheinnermostloop(a).Aninnertreecapturestheinner loop, and is nested inside an outer tree which “calls” the inner tree. Theinnertreereturnstotheoutertreeonceitexitsalongitsloop
anditsnestedtracetreeconfiguration(right).Theoutertreecalls the two inner nested trace trees and places guards at their side exit locations.
In general, if loops are nested to depth k, and each loop has n paths (ongeometricaverage),thisna¨ıvestrategyyieldsO(nk)traces, which can easily fill the trace cache.
Inordertoexecuteprogramswithnestedloopsefficiently,a tracing system needs a technique for covering the nested loops with native code without exponential trace duplication.
4.1 	Nesting Algorithm
The key insight is that if each loop is represented by its own trace tree, the code for each loop can be contained only in its own tree, and outer loop paths will not be duplicated. Another key fact is that we are not tracing arbitrary bytecodes that might have irreduceable controlflowgraphs,butratherbytecodesproducedbyacompiler foralanguagewithstructuredcontrolflow.Thus,giventwoloop edges,thesystemcaneasilydeterminewhethertheyarenested and which is the inner loop. Using this knowledge, the system can compile inner and outer loops separately, and make the outer loop’s traces call the inner loop’s trace tree.
m is close to 1, the resulting trace trees will be tractable.
An important detail is that the call to the inner trace tree must act like a function call site: it must return to the same point every time. The goal of nesting is to make inner and outer loops independent; thuswhentheinnertreeiscalled,itmustexittothesamepoint intheoutertreeeverytimewiththesametypemap.Becausewe cannotactuallyguaranteethisproperty,wemustguardonitafter thecall,andsideexitifthepropertydoesnothold.Acommon reasonfortheinnertreenottoreturntothesamepointwould beiftheinnertreetookanewsideexitforwhichithadnever compiledatrace.Atthispoint,theinterpreterPCisintheinner tree,sowecannotcontinuerecordingorexecutingtheoutertree. Ifthishappensduringrecording,weaborttheoutertrace,togive the inner tree a chance to finish growing. A future execution of the outer tree would then be able to properly finish and record a call to the inner tree. If an inner tree side exit happens during execution of acompiledtracefortheoutertree,wesimplyexittheoutertrace and start recording a new branch in the inner tree.
Whenweexitaloop(detectedbycomparingtheinterpreterPC withtherangegivenbytheloopedge),westopthetrace.The keystepofthealgorithmoccurswhenwearerecordingatrace for loop LR(Rfor loop being recorded) and we reach the header of a different loop LO(O for other loop). Note that LOmust be an inner loop of LRbecause we stop the trace when we exit a loop.
•IfLOhasatype-matchingcompiledtracetree,wecallLOas a nested trace tree. If the call succeeds, then we record the call in the trace for LR. On future executions, the trace for LRwill call the inner trace directly.
•IfLOdoesnothaveatype-matchingcompiledtracetreeyet, wehavetoobtainitbeforeweareabletoproceed.Inorder todothis,wesimplyabortrecordingthefirsttrace.Thetrace monitorwillseetheinnerloopheader,andwillimmediately start recording the inner loop.2
If all the loops in a nest are type-stable, then loop nesting creates
Theblacklistingalgorithmneedsmodificationtoworkwellwith nesting.Theproblemisthatouterlooptracesoftenabortduring startup (because the inner tree is not available or takes a side exit), whichwouldleadtotheirbeingquicklyblacklistedbythebasic algorithm.
The key observation is that when an outer trace aborts because the inner tree is not ready, this is probably a temporary condition. Thus, we should not count such aborts toward blacklisting as long as we are able to build up more traces for the inner tree.
Inourimplementation,whenanoutertreeabortsontheinner tree,weincrementtheoutertree’sblacklistcounterasusualand backoffoncompilingit.Whentheinnertreefinishesatrace,we decrementtheblacklistcounterontheouterloop,“forgiving”the outer loop for aborting previously. We also undo the backoff so that the outer tree can start immediately trying to compile the next time we reach it.
2 Instead of aborting the outer recording, we could principally merely sus-pendtherecording,butthatwouldrequiretheimplementationtobeable torecordseveraltracessimultaneously,complicatingtheimplementation,
Thissectionexplainshowarecordedtraceistranslatedtoan optimizedmachinecodetrace.Thetracecompilationsubsystem, NANOJIT,isseparatefromtheVMandcanbeusedforother
while saving only a few iterations in the interpreter. 	applications.
5.1 	Optimizations
BecausetracesareinSSAformandhavenojoinpointsorφ-nodes,certainoptimizationsareeasytoimplement.Inorderto get good startup performance, the optimizations must run quickly, sowechoseasmallsetofoptimizations.Weimplementedthe optimizations as pipelined filters so that they can be turned on and offindependently,andyetallruninjusttwolooppassesoverthe trace: one forward and one backward.
EverytimethetracerecorderemitsaLIRinstruction,thein-structionisimmediatelypassedtothefirstfilterintheforward pipeline.Thus,forwardfilteroptimizationsareperformedasthe trace is recorded. Each filter may pass each instruction to the next filterunchanged,writeadifferentinstructiontothenextfilter,or writenoinstructionatall.Forexample,theconstantfoldingfilter canreplaceamultiplyinstructionlikev13:=mul3, 1000witha constant instruction v13= 3000.
We currently apply four forward filters:
•OnISAswithoutfloating-pointinstructions,asoft-floatfilter converts floating-point LIR instructions to sequences of integer instructions.
•CSE (constant subexpression elimination),
•expression simplification, including constant folding and a few
Figure9.TaggedvaluesintheSpiderMonkeyJSinterpreter. Testing tags, unboxing (extracting the untagged value) and boxing (creating tagged values) are significant costs. Avoiding these costs is a key benefit of tracing.
heuristicselectsvwithminimumvm.Themotivationisthatthis frees up a register for as long as possible given a single spill.
Ifweneedtospillavaluevsatthispoint,wegeneratethe restorecodejustafterthecodeforthecurrentinstruction.The corresponding spill code is generated just after the last point where vs was used. The register that was assigned to vs is marked free for theprecedingcode,becausethatregistercannowbeusedfreely without affecting the following code
primarily algebraic identities that allowDOUBLE to be replaced withINT. For example, LIR that converts anINTto aDOUBLE and then back again would be removed by this filter.
Whentracerecordingiscompleted,nanojitrunsthebackward optimizationfilters.Theseareusedforoptimizationsthatrequire backwardprogramanalysis.Whenrunningthebackwardfilters, nanojit reads one LIR instruction at a time, and the reads are passed through the pipeline.
We currently apply three backward filters:
•Dead data-stack store elimination. The LIR trace encodes many stores to locations in the interpreter stack. But these values are neverreadbackbeforeexitingthetrace(bytheinterpreteror anothertrace).Thus,storestothestackthatareoverwritten beforethenextexitaredead.Storestolocationsthatareoff the top of the interpreter stack at future exits are also dead.
•Dead call-stack store elimination. This is the same optimization
Todemonstratetheeffectivenessofourapproach,wehaveim-plementedatrace-baseddynamiccompilerfortheSpiderMonkey JavaScriptVirtualMachine(4).SpiderMonkeyistheJavaScript VM embedded in Mozilla’s Firefox open-source web browser (2), which is used by more than 200 million users world-wide. The core of SpiderMonkey is a bytecode interpreter implemented in C++.
InSpiderMonkey,allJavaScriptvaluesarerepresentedbythe type jsval. A jsval is machine word in which up to the 3 of the least significant bits are a type tag, and the remaining bits are data. See Figure 6 for details. All pointers contained in jsvals point to GC-controlled blocks aligned on 8-byte boundaries.
JavaScript object values are mappings of string-valued property names to arbitrary values. They are represented in one of two ways inSpiderMonkey.Mostobjectsarerepresentedbyasharedstruc-tural description, called the object shape, that maps property names toarrayindexesusingahashtable.Theobjectstoresapointerto theshapeandthearrayofitsownpropertyvalues.Objectswith large, unique sets of property names store their properties directly
as above, except applied to the interpreter’s call stack used for 	in a hash table.
function call inlining.
•Deadcodeelimination.Thiseliminatesanyoperationthat stores to a value that is never used.
	Thegarbagecollectorisanexact,non-generational,stop-the-world mark-and-sweep collector.
	In the rest of this section we discuss key areas of the TraceMon-key implementation.
backwardpassoverthetrace(itisintegratedwiththecodegen-erator).Bythetimetheallocatorhasreachedaninstructionlike v3=add v1, v2, it has already assigned a register to v3. If v1and v2have not yet been assigned registers, the allocator assigns a free register to each. If there are no free registers, a value is selected for spilling. We use a class heuristic that selects the “oldest” register-
Theinterpretermusthitaloopedgeandenterthemonitorin order to call a native trace for the first time. The monitor computes thecurrenttypemap,checksthetracecacheforatraceforthe current PC and type map, and if it finds one, executes the trace.
Toexecuteatrace,themonitormustbuildatraceactivation recordcontainingimportedlocalandglobalvariables,temporary
carried value (6). 	stack space, and space for arguments to native calls. The local and
The heuristic considers the set R of values v in registers imme-	global values are then copied from the interpreter state to the trace
diately after the current instruction for spilling. Let vmbe the last 	activation record. Then, the trace is called like a normal C function
instruction before the current where each v is referred to. Then the 	pointer.
Whenatracecallreturns,themonitorrestorestheinterpreter state.First,themonitorchecksthereasonforthetraceexitand appliesblacklistingifneeded.Then,itpopsorsynthesizesinter-preter JavaScript call stack frames as needed. Finally, it copies the imported variables back from the trace activation record to the in-
Recordingisactivatedbyapointerswapthatsetstheinter-preter’sdispatchtabletocallasingle“interrupt”routineforev-erybytecode.Theinterruptroutinefirstcallsabytecode-specific recordingroutine.Then,itturnsoffrecordingifnecessary(e.g., the trace ended). Finally, it jumps to the standard interpreter byte-
terpreter state. 	code implementation. Some bytecodes have effects on the type map
At least in the current implementation, these steps have a non-negligibleruntimecost,sominimizingthenumberofinterpreter-to-traceandtrace-to-interpretertransitionsisessentialforperfor-mance.(seealsoSection3.3).Ourexperiments(seeFigure12) showthatforprogramswecantracewellsuchtransitionshap-peninfrequentlyandhencedonotcontributesignificantlytototal runtime.Inafewprograms,wherethesystemispreventedfrom recordingbranchtracesforhotsideexitsbyaborts,thiscostcan rise to up to 10% of total execution time.
thatcannotbepredictedbeforeexecutingthebytecode(e.g.,call-ingString.charCodeAt,whichreturnsanintegerorNaNifthe index argument is out of range). For these, we arrange for the inter-pretertocallintotherecorderagainafterexecutingthebytecode. Sincesuchhooksarerelativelyrare,weembedthemdirectlyinto theinterpreter,withanadditionalruntimechecktoseewhethera recorder is currently active.
While separating the interpreter from the recorder reduces indi-vidual code complexity, it also requires careful implementation and
Transitionsfromatracetoabranchtraceatasideexitavoidthe costsofcallingtracesfromthemonitor,inafeaturecalledtrace stitching.Atasideexit,theexitingtraceonlyneedstowritelive register-carried values back to its trace activation record. In our im-plementation, identical type maps yield identical activation record layouts,sothetraceactivationrecordcanbereusedimmediately by the branch trace.
Inprogramswithbranchytracetreeswithsmalltraces,trace stitchinghasanoticeablecost.Althoughwritingtomemoryand thensoonreadingbackwouldbeexpectedtohaveahighL1 cachehitrate,forsmalltracestheincreasedinstructioncounthas anoticeablecost.Also,ifthewritesandreadsareveryclose inthedynamicinstructionstream,wehavefoundthatcurrent x86processorsoftenincurpenaltiesof6cyclesormore(e.g.,if theinstructionsusedifferentbaseregisterswithequalvalues,the processor may not be able to detect that the addresses are the same right away).
Thealternatesolutionistorecompileanentiretracetree,thus achievinginter-traceregisterallocation(10).Thedisadvantageis that tree recompilation takes time quadratic in the number of traces. Webelievethatthecostofrecompilingatracetreeeverytime abranchisaddedwouldbeprohibitive.Thatproblemmightbe mitigatedbyrecompilingonlyatcertainpoints,oronlyforvery hot, stable trees.
Inthefuture,multicorehardwareisexpectedtobecommon, makingbackgroundtreerecompilationattractive.Inacloselyre-latedproject(13)backgroundrecompilationyieldedspeedupsof upto1.25xonbenchmarkswithmanybranchtraces.Weplanto apply this technique to TraceMonkey as future work.
6.3 	Trace Recording
derMonkeyfollowsafat-bytecodedesign,whichwasfoundtobe beneficial to pure interpreter performance.
Infat-bytecodedesigns,individualbytecodescanimplement complexprocessing(e.g.,thegetpropbytecode,whichimple-ments full JavaScript property value access, including special cases for cached and dense array access).
Fatbytecodeshavetwoadvantages:fewerbytecodesmeans lower dispatch cost, and bigger bytecode implementations give the compiler more opportunities to optimize the interpreter.
FatbytecodesareaproblemforTraceMonkeybecausethey requiretherecordertoreimplementthesamespecialcaselogic inthesameway.Also,theadvantagesarereducedbecause(a) dispatchcostsareeliminatedentirelyincompiledtraces,(b)the tracescontainonlyonespecialcase,nottheinterpreter’slarge chunk of code, and (c) TraceMonkey spends less time running the base interpreter.
One way we have mitigated these problems is by implementing certaincomplexbytecodesintherecorderassequencesofsimple bytecodes. Expressing the original semantics this way is not too dif-ficult, and recording simple bytecodes is much easier. This enables us to retain the advantages of fat bytecodes while avoiding some of their problems for trace recording. This is particularly effective for fat bytecodes that recurse back into the interpreter, for example to convert an object into a primitive value by invoking a well-known method on the object, since it lets us inline this function call.
It is important to note that we split fat opcodes into thinner op-codes only during recording. When running purely interpretatively (i.e. code that has been blacklisted), the interpreter directly and ef-ficiently executes the fat opcodes.
to the currently running interpreter bytecode trace. A good imple-mentationshouldhavelowimpactonnon-tracinginterpreterper-formanceandaconvenientwayforimplementerstomaintainse-mantic equivalence.
In our implementation, the only direct modification to the inter-preter is a call to the trace monitor at loop edges. In our benchmark results(seeFigure12)thetotaltimespentinthemonitor(forall activities)isusuallylessthan5%,soweconsidertheinterpreter impactrequirementmet.Incrementingtheloophitcounterisex-
SpiderMonkey, like many VMs, needs to preempt the user program periodically.Themainreasonsaretopreventinfinitelylooping scripts from locking up the host system and to schedule GC.
In the interpreter, this had been implemented by setting a “pre-emptnow”flagthatwascheckedoneverybackwardjump.This strategy carried over into TraceMonkey: the VM inserts a guard on thepreemptionflagateveryloopedge.Wemeasuredlessthana 1%increaseinruntimeonmostbenchmarksforthisextraguard. In practice, the cost is detectable only for programs with very short
pensive because it requires us to look up the loop in the trace cache, 	loops.
but we have tuned our loops to become hot and trace very quickly (on the second iteration). The hit counter implementation could be improved,whichmightgiveusasmallincreaseinoverallperfor-mance,aswellasmoreflexibilitywithtuninghotnessthresholds. Once a loop is blacklisted we never call into the trace monitor for that loop (see Section 3.3).
Wetestedandrejectedasolutionthatavoidedtheguardsby compilingtheloopedgeasanunconditionaljump,andpatching thejumptargettoanexitroutinewhenpreemptionisrequired. Thissolutioncanmakethenormalcaseslightlyfaster,butthen preemption becomes very slow. The implementation was also very complex, especially trying to restart execution after the preemption.
6.5 	Calling External Functions
Like most interpreters, SpiderMonkey has a foreign function inter-face (FFI) that allows it to call C builtins and host system functions (e.g.,webbrowsercontrolandDOMaccess).TheFFIhasastan-dard signature for JS-callable functions, the key argument of which isanarrayofboxedvalues.Externalfunctionscalledthroughthe FFI interact with the program state through an interpreter API (e.g., to read a property from an argument). There are also certain inter-preter builtins that do not use the FFI, but interact with the program stateinthesameway,suchastheCallIteratorNextfunction usedwithiteratorobjects.TraceMonkeymustsupportthisFFIin order to speed up code that interacts with the host system inside hot loops.
Calling external functions from TraceMonkey is potentially dif-ficultbecausetracesdonotupdatetheinterpreterstateuntilexit-ing. In particular, external functions may need the call stack or the global variables, but they may be out of date.
Fortheout-of-datecallstackproblem,werefactoredsomeof theinterpreterAPIimplementationfunctionstore-materializethe interpreter call stack on demand.
WedevelopedaC++staticanalysisandannotatedsomeinter-preterfunctionsinordertoverifythatthecallstackisrefreshed atanypointitneedstobeused.Inordertoaccessthecallstack, afunctionmustbeannotatedaseitherFORCESSTACKorRE-QUIRESSTACK. These annotations are also required in order to call REQUIRESSTACK functions, which are presumed to access the call stacktransitively.FORCESSTACKisatrustedannotation,applied to only 5 functions, that means the function refreshes the call stack. REQUIRESSTACKisanuntrustedannotationthatmeansthefunc-tion may only be called if the call stack has already been refreshed.
Similarly,wedetectwhenhostfunctionsattempttodirectly read or write global variables, and force the currently running trace tosideexit.Thisisnecessarysincewecacheandunboxglobal variables into the activation record during trace execution.
Sincebothcall-stackaccessandglobalvariableaccessare
Figure11.Fractionofdynamicbytecodesexecutedbyinter-preter and on native traces. The speedup vs. interpreter is shown inparenthesesnexttoeachtest.Thefractionofbytecodesexe-cutedwhilerecordingistoosmalltoseeinthisfigure,except for crypto-md5, where fully 3% of bytecodes are executed while recording.Inmostofthetests,almostallthebytecodesareexe-cutedbycompiledtraces.Threeofthebenchmarksarenottraced at all and run in the interpreter.
loops and heavily branching code, and a specialized fuzz tester in-deed revealed several regressions which we subsequently corrected.
Another problem is that external functions can reenter the inter-preter by calling scripts, which in turn again might want to access the call stack or global variables. To address this problem, we made the VM set a flag whenever the interpreter is reentered while a com-piled trace is running.
Every call to an external function then checks this flag and exits the trace immediately after returning from the external function call if it is set. There are many external functions that seldom or never reenter,andtheycanbecalledwithoutproblem,andwillcause trace exit only if necessary.
TheFFI’sboxedvaluearrayrequirementhasaperformance cost,sowedefinedanewFFIthatallowsCfunctionstobean-notatedwiththeirargumenttypessothatthetracercancallthem directly, without unnecessary argument conversions.
Currently, we do not support calling native property get and set override functions or DOMfunctions directlyfrom trace. Support is planned future work.
WeevaluatedourJavaScripttracingimplementationusingSun-Spider, the industry standard JavaScript benchmark suite. SunSpi-derconsistsof26short-running(lessthan250ms,average26ms) JavaScript programs. This is in stark contrast to benchmark suites suchasSpecJVM98(3)usedtoevaluatedesktopandserverJava VMs. Many programs in those benchmarks use large data sets and execute for minutes. The SunSpider programs carry out a variety of tasks, primarily 3d rendering, bit-bashing, cryptographic encoding, math kernels, and string processing.
	AllexperimentswereperformedonaMacBookProwith2.2 GHz Core 2 processor and 2 GB RAM running MacOS 10.5.
Benchmarkresults.Themainquestioniswhetherprograms run faster with tracing. For this, we ran the standard SunSpider test driver,whichstartsaJavaScriptinterpreter,loadsandrunseach programonceforwarmup,thenloadsandrunseachprogram10 times and reports the average time taken by each. We ran 4 differ-ent configurations for comparison: (a) SpiderMonkey, the baseline
Duringdevelopment,wehadaccesstoexistingJavaScripttest suites,butmostofthemwerenotdesignedwithtracingVMsin mind and contained few loops.
OnetoolthathelpedusgreatlywasMozilla’sJavaScriptfuzz tester,JSFUNFUZZ,whichgeneratesrandomJavaScriptprograms bynestingrandomlanguageelements.WemodifiedJSFUNFUZZ togenerateloops,andalsototestmoreheavilycertainconstructs we suspected would reveal flaws in our implementation. For exam-ple, we suspected bugs in TraceMonkey’s handling of type-unstable
(e) V8, the method-compiling JavaScript VM from Google.
Figure 10 shows the relative speedups achieved by tracing, SFX, and V8 against the baseline (SpiderMonkey). Tracing achieves the best speedups in integer-heavy benchmarks, up to the 25x speedup on bitops-bitwise-and.
TraceMonkeyisthefastestVMon9ofthe26benchmarks (3d-morph,bitops-3bit-bits-in-byte,bitops-bitwise-and, crypto-sha1, math-cordic, math-partial-sums, math-spectral-norm,string-base64,string-validate-input).
%#"
&'()*+,"
%!"	-./"
	01" $#"
$!"
#"
!"
Figure10.Speedupvs.abaselineJavaScriptinterpreter(SpiderMonkey)forourtrace-basedJITcompiler,Apple’sSquirrelFishExtreme inline threading interpreter and Google’s V8 JS compiler. Our system generates particularly efficient code for programs that benefit most from type specialization, which includes SunSpider Benchmark programs that perform bit manipulation. We type-specialize the code in question touseintegerarithmetic,whichsubstantiallyimprovesperformance.Foroneofthebenchmarkprogramsweexecute25timesfasterthan the SpiderMonkey interpreter, and almost 5 times faster than V8 and SFX. For a large number of benchmarks all three VMs produce similar results. We perform worst on benchmark programs that we do not trace and instead fall back onto the interpreter. This includes the recursive benchmarks access-binary-trees and control-flow-recursive, for which we currently don’t generate any native code.
In particular, the bitops benchmarks are short programs that per-form many bitwise operations,so TraceMonkey cancover the en-tire program with 1 or 2 traces that operate on integers. TraceMon-key runs all the other programs in this set almost entirely as native
•Twoprogramstracewell,buthavealongcompilationtime. access-nbody forms a large number of traces (81). crypto-md5 forms one very long trace. We expect to improve performance on this programs by improving the compilation speed of nano-
code. 	jit.
regexp-dnaisdominatedbyregularexpressionmatching, which is implemented in all 3 VMs by a special regular expression compiler.Thus,performanceonthisbenchmarkhaslittlerelation to the trace compilation approach discussed in this paper.
	TraceMonkey’s smaller speedups on the other benchmarks can be attributed to a few specific causes:
•Theimplementationdoesnotcurrentlytracerecursion,so TraceMonkeyachievesasmallspeedupornospeedupon benchmarksthatuserecursionextensively:3d-cube,3d-raytrace,access-binary-trees,string-tagcloud,and controlflow-recursive.
•Theimplementationdoesnotcurrentlytraceevalandsome otherfunctionsimplementedinC.Becausedate-format-tofteanddate-format-xparbusesuchfunctionsintheir main loops, we do not trace them.
•Theimplementationdoesnotcurrentlytracethroughregular expressionreplaceoperations.Thereplacefunctioncanbe passed a function object used to compute the replacement text. Ourimplementationcurrentlydoesnottracefunctionscalled as replace functions. The run time of string-unpack-code is dominated by such a replace call.
•Someprogramstraceverywell,andspeedupcomparedto theinterpreter,butarenotasfastasSFXand/orV8,namely
fannkuch,access-nsieve,andcrypto-aes.Thereasonis notclear,butalloftheseprogramshavenestedloopswith small bodies, so we suspect that the implementation has a rela-tively high cost for calling nested traces. string-fasta traces well, but its run time is dominated by string processing builtins, which are unaffected by tracing and seem to be less efficient in SpiderMonkey than in the two other VMs.
Detailed performance metrics. In Figure 11 we show the frac-tion of instructions interpreted and the fraction of instructions exe-cuted as native code. This figure shows that for many programs, we are able to execute almost all the code natively.
Figure 12 breaks down the total execution time into four activ-ities:interpretingbytecodeswhilenotrecording,recordingtraces (includingtimetakentointerprettherecordedtrace),compiling traces to native code, and executing native code traces.
Thesedetailedmetricsallowustoestimateparametersfora simplemodeloftracingperformance.Theseestimatesshouldbe consideredveryrough,asthevaluesobservedontheindividual benchmarkshavelargestandarddeviations(ontheorderofthe
Figure 13.Detailed trace recording statistics for the SunSpider benchmark set.
mean).Weexcluderegexp-dnafromthefollowingcalculations, 	fastestavailableJavaScriptinlinethreadedinterpreter(SFX)on9 because most of its time is spent in the regular expression matcher, 	of 26 benchmarks.
whichhasmuchdifferentperformancecharacteristicsfromthe 
otherprograms.(Notethatthisonlymakesadifferenceofabout
interpretershowsthatonaverage,abytecodeexecutesinabout 35cycles.Nativetracestakeabout9cyclesperbytecode,a3.9x speedup over the interpreter.
Usingsimilarcomputations,wefindthattracerecordingtakes about3800cyclesperbytecode,andcompilation3150cyclesper bytecode.Hence,duringrecordingandcompilingtheVMrunsat 1/200thespeedoftheinterpreter.Becauseitcosts6950cyclesto compileabytecode,andwesave26cycleseachtimethatcodeis run natively, we break even after running a trace 270 times.
TheotherVMswecomparedwithachieveanoverallspeedup of3.0xrelativetoourbaselineinterpreter.Ourestimatednative codespeedupof3.9xissignificantlybetter.Thissuggeststhat our compilation techniques can generate more efficient native code than any other current JavaScript VM.
These estimates also indicate that our startup performance could be substantially better if we improved the speed of trace recording and compilation. The estimated 200x slowdown for recording and compilation is very rough, and may be influenced by startup factors in the interpreter (e.g., caches that have not warmed up yet during recording).Oneobservationsupportingthisconjectureisthatin the tracer, interpreted bytecodes take about 180 cycles to run. Still, recording and compilation are clearly both expensive, and a better implementation,possiblyincludingredesignoftheLIRabstract syntax or encoding, would improve startup performance.
Ourperformanceresultsconfirmthattypespecializationusing tracetreessubstantiallyimprovesperformance.Weareableto outperformthefastestavailableJavaScriptcompiler(V8)andthe
Traceoptimizationfordynamiclanguages.Theclosestareaof relatedworkisonapplyingtraceoptimizationtotype-specialize dynamiclanguages.Existingworksharestheideaofgenerating type-specializedcodespeculativelywithguardsalonginterpreter traces.
Toourknowledge,Rigo’sPsyco(16)istheonlypublished type-specializing trace compiler for a dynamic language (Python). Psyco does not attempt to identify hot loops or inline function calls. Instead, Psyco transforms loops to mutual recursion before running and traces all operations.
Pall’s LuaJIT is a Lua VM in development that uses trace com-pilation ideas. (1). There are no publications on LuaJIT but the cre-ator has told us that LuaJIT has a similar design to our system, but willusealessaggressivetypespeculation(e.g.,usingafloating-pointrepresentationforallnumbervalues)anddoesnotgenerate nested traces for nested loops.
Generaltraceoptimization.Generaltraceoptimizationhas alongerhistorythathastreatedmostlynativecodeandtyped languages like Java. Thus, these systems have focused less on type specialization and more on other optimizations.
Dynamo(7)byBalaetal,introducednativecodetracingasa replacementforprofile-guidedoptimization(PGO).Amajorgoal wastoperformPGOonlinesothattheprofilewasspecificto the current execution. Dynamo used loop headers as candidate hot traces, but did not try to create loop traces specifically.
TracetreeswereoriginallyproposedbyGaletal.(11)inthe contextofJava,astaticallytypedlanguage.Theirtracetreesac-tuallyinlinedpartsofouterloopswithintheinnerloops(because
Figure 12.Fraction of time spent on major VM activities. The speedupvs.interpreterisshowninparenthesesnexttoeachtest. Most programs where the VM spends the majority of its time run-ning native code have a good speedup. Recording and compilation costs can be substantial; speeding up those parts of the implemen-tation would improve SunSpider performance.
inner loops become hot first), leading to much greater tail duplica-
eratenativecodewithnearlythesamestructurebutbetterperfor-mance.
Callthreading,alsoknownascontextthreading(8),compiles methodsbygeneratinganativecallinstructiontoaninterpreter methodforeachinterpreterbytecode.Acall-returnpairhasbeen shown to be a potentially much more efficient dispatch mechanism than the indirect jumps used in standard bytecode interpreters.
Inlinethreading(15)copieschunksofinterpreternativecode which implement the required bytecodes into a native code cache, thus acting as a simple per-method JIT compiler that eliminates the dispatch overhead.
	Neither call threading nor inline threading perform type special-ization.
Apple’sSquirrelFishExtreme(5)isaJavaScriptimplementa-tionbasedoncallthreadingwithselectiveinlinethreading.Com-binedwithefficientinterpreterengineering,thesethreadingtech-niques have given SFX excellent performance on the standard Sun-Spider benchmarks.
Google’sV8isaJavaScriptimplementationprimarilybased oninlinethreading,withcallthreadingonlyforverycomplex operations.
9. Conclusions
This paper described how to run dynamic languages efficiently by recordinghottracesandgeneratingtype-specializednativecode. Our technique focuses on aggressively inlined loops, and for each loop,itgeneratesatreeofnativecodetracesrepresentingthe pathsandvaluetypesthroughtheloopobservedatruntime.We explainedhowtoidentifyloopnestingrelationshipsandgenerate nestedtracesinordertoavoidexcessivecodeduplicationdue tothemanypathsthroughaloopnest.Wedescribedourtype specializationalgorithm.Wealsodescribedourtracecompiler, whichtranslatesatracefromanintermediaterepresentationto
tion. 	optimized native code in two linear passes.
YETI,fromZaleskietal.(19)appliedDynamo-styletracing toJavainordertoachieveinlining,indirectjumpelimination, and other optimizations. Their primary focus was on designing an interpreter that could easily be gradually re-engineered as a tracing
Ourexperimentalresultsshowthatinpracticeloopstypically areenteredwithonlyafewdifferentcombinationsofvaluetypes ofvariables.Thus,asmallnumberoftracesperloopissufficient torunaprogramefficiently.Ourexperimentsalsoshowthaton
VM. 	programs amenable to tracing, we achieve speedups of 2x to 20x.
Suganuma et al. (18) described region-based compilation (RBC), arelativeoftracing.Aregionisansubprogramworthoptimizing that can include subsets of any number of methods. Thus, the com-piler has more flexibility and can potentially generate better code, but the profiling and compilation systems are correspondingly more complex.
Typespecializationfordynamiclanguages.Dynamiclan-guageimplementorshavelongrecognizedtheimportanceoftype specialization for performance. Most previous work has focused on methods instead of traces.
Chamberset.al(9)pioneeredtheideaofcompilingmultiple versionsofaprocedurespecializedfortheinputtypesinthelan-guageSelf.Inoneimplementation,theygeneratedaspecialized method online each time a method was called with new input types. Inanother,theyusedanofflinewhole-programstaticanalysisto inferinputtypesandconstantreceivertypesatcallsites.Interest-ingly, the two techniques produced nearly the same performance.
Salib (17) designed a type inference algorithm for Python based on the Cartesian Product Algorithm and used the results to special-ize on types and translate the program to C++.
McCloskey(14)hasworkinprogressbasedonalanguage-independenttypeinferencethatisusedtogenerateefficientC implementations of JavaScript and Python programs.
Native code generation by interpreters. The traditional inter-preterdesignisavirtualmachinethatdirectlyexecutesASTsor machine-code-like bytecodes. Researchers have shown how to gen-
10. Future Work
Workisunderwayinanumberofareastofurtherimprovethe performanceofour trace-basedJavaScriptcompiler.Wecurrently donottraceacrossrecursivefunctioncalls,butplantoaddthe supportforthiscapabilityinthenearterm.Wearealsoexploring adoption of the existing work on tree recompilation in the context of the presented dynamic compiler in order to minimize JIT pause times and obtain the best of both worlds, fast tree stitching as well as the improved code quality due to tree recompilation.
Wealsoplanonaddingsupportfortracingacrossregularex-pressionsubstitutionsusinglambdafunctions,functionapplica-tionsandexpressionevaluationusingeval.Alltheselanguage constructsarecurrentlyexecutedviainterpretation,whichlimits our performance for applications that use those features.
Acknowledgments
PartsofthisefforthavebeensponsoredbytheNationalScience Foundation under grants CNS-0615443 and CNS-0627747, as well asbytheCaliforniaMICROProgramandindustrialsponsorSun Microsystems under Project No. 07-127.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or rec-ommendationsexpressedherearethoseoftheauthorandshould
notbeinterpretedasnecessarilyrepresentingtheofficialviews, policiesorendorsements,eitherexpressedorimplied,oftheNa-tional Science foundation (NSF), any other agency of the U.S. Gov-ernment, or any of the companies mentioned above.
References
02/msg00051.html.
[2]Mozilla—FirefoxwebbrowserandThunderbirdemailclient-http://www.mozilla.com.
[3]SPECJVM98 - http://www.spec.org/jvm98/.
http://www.mozilla.org/js/spidermonkey/.
[5]Surfin’Safari-BlogArchive-AnnouncingSquirrelFishExtreme-http://webkit.org/blog/214/introducing-squirrelfish-extreme/.
[10]A.Gal.EfficientBytecodeVerificationandCompilationinaVirtual MachineDissertation.PhDthesis,UniversityOfCalifornia,Irvine, 2006.
[11]A.Gal,C.W.Probst,andM.Franz.HotpathVM:AneffectiveJIT 	compilerforresource-constraineddevices. InProceedingsofthe 	InternationalConferenceonVirtualExecutionEnvironments,pages 	144–153. ACM Press, 2006.
[12]C.Garrett,J.Dean,D.Grove,andC.Chambers.Measurementand 	Application of Dynamic Receiver Class Distributions.1994.
[13]J. Ha, M. R. Haghighat, S. Cong, and K. S. McKinley.A concurrent 	trace-basedjust-in-timecompilerforjavascript. Dept.ofComputer 	Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, TR-09-06, 2009.
[14]B. McCloskey.Personal communication.
[15]I. Piumarta and F. Riccardi.Optimizing direct threaded code by selec-tive inlining.In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 1998 conference onProgramminglanguagedesignandimplementation,pages291–
dynamic optimization system.In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN ConferenceonProgrammingLanguageDesignandImplementation, pages 1–12. ACM Press, 2000.
[8]M. Berndl, B. Vitale, M. Zaleski, and A. Brown.Context Threading: aFlexibleandEfficientDispatchTechniqueforVirtualMachineIn-terpreters.InCodeGenerationandOptimization,2005.CGO2005. International Symposium on, pages 15–26, 2005.
[9]C.ChambersandD.Ungar. 	Customization:OptimizingCompiler TechnologyforSELF,aDynamically-TypedObject-OrientedPro-grammingLanguage. 	InProceedingsoftheACMSIGPLAN1989 ConferenceonProgrammingLanguageDesignandImplementation, pages 146–160. ACM New York, NY, USA, 1989.
[17]M.Salib. Starkiller:AStaticTypeInferencerandCompilerfor 	Python.In Master’s Thesis, 2004.
[18]T.Suganuma,T.Yasue,andT.Nakatani.ARegion-BasedCompila-tionTechniqueforDynamicCompilers.ACMTransactionsonPro-gramming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS), 28(1):134–174, 2006.
[19]M.Zaleski,A.D.Brown,andK.Stoodley. 	YETI:AgraduallY 	ExtensibleTraceInterpreter. InProceedingsoftheInternational 	ConferenceonVirtualExecutionEnvironments,pages83–93.ACM 	Press, 2007.